---
layout: page
title: The International Council of RSE Associations - Charter of the International Council of RSE Associations
hidetitle: true
---

> The Charter of the International Council of RSE Associations has passed the Council's vote and was adopted on 2021-07-14.

# Charter of the International Council of RSE Associations

The "International Council of RSE Associations" ("the Council") was
founded in 2021 by a group of national and multi-national RSE
Associations to establish a formal mechanism to facilitate international
collaboration. The creation of a regular forum to communicate and
formally meet to ensure cohesion between associations will provide a
platform for open discussion around international issues and affairs,
including international RSE conferences. This enables collective
decision making, collaboration among national associations as well as
peer support.

This document describes the purpose, function, membership criteria, and
governance of the International Council of RSE Associations.

## Purpose and Function

### 1. Communication and Coordination

**Coordination of participation in other interest groups:** Member
associations may coordinate participation in related groups such as the
[*Research Software Alliance (ReSA)*](https://www.researchsoft.org/) and
the [*Research Data Alliance (RDA)*](https://www.rd-alliance.org/).

**Coordination of advocacy:** Member associations have the opportunity
to develop a common baseline for advocating for the implementation of
Research Software Engineering at the institutions as well as national
policy makers, funders, etc.

**Event Coordination**: As member associations plan events, they will be
expected to bring the dates along with an overview of the activities to
the Council in a timely manner. This will minimize the likelihood that
associations schedule conflicting events. At this time, events will be
considered to be anything spanning two or more half-days.

**International RSE Event Branding:** Member associations are welcome to
use the "International RSE" branding, however, in order to secure
endorsement by the associations represented in the Council, the event
should first be brought to the Council for approval.

**International RSE Conference Planning:** The Council will be the main
point of contact/initiation for large internationally coordinated RSE
events, including future international conferences. An International RSE
Conference could be rotated around societies/associations for each
instance with agreement from the international committee. Each
association could then replace their national conference with an
international one for a single year and everyone is therefore involved.
This would avoid the issue of having to set up new
structures/associations to manage finance, etc. This would also foster
closer connections of RSEs in different countries and improve the
profile of the entire RSE community. The conferences could be in-person
and broadcast to attendees unable to travel due to time or budget
constraints.

### 2. Discussion Forum

**Organizational Discussion**: The member associations will be given the
opportunity to raise questions and set the agenda for discussion on
topics pertaining to the organization and operation of a national
association. It is the intent of this Council to provide a general forum
to share knowledge, experiences, and best practices surrounding the
formation and growth of national RSE associations. By providing a
regular forum of the leadership of each association knowledge sharing
will be possible not just for those that have pre-existing
relationships, but also for new associations.

### 3. Conflict resolution between Associations

**Questions:** Without the Council, questions about motives could be
left unasked, leading to conflict or ill will. It is our intent to
establish the regular Council meeting to provide a formal and public
opportunity to ask questions to other associations. It is anticipated
that other associations will be interested in the answers.

**Conflict resolution:** Should a substantive conflict between
associations arise, the Council will provide a formal path to
resolution. Member associations can bring the issue to the Council
meeting and request the Council work together to resolve the issue.

### 4. Development of new national associations

The Council is mandated to help and to encourage the initiatives to
develop new national RSE associations. The Council can delegate this
responsibility to well-established national associations in closer
geographical proximity and / or with better language and culture ties to
support such initiatives.

The new establishing associations can be present at the Council as
observing participants. Once matured, the new associations can be
accepted as full members of the Council. The acceptance criteria will be
determined and updated by all existing members of the Council. See
membership eligibility below.

## **Membership Eligibility**

The Council will begin with the formal membership of the founding
associations:

1.  be-RSE
2.  de-RSE
3.  NL-RSE
4.  Nordic RSE
5.  RSE-AUNZ
6.  The Society of RSE (UK)
7.  US-RSE

The addition of future association members will be voted on by the
existing Council membership. For the purposes of this document, we
anticipate initial membership criteria to require an association reach a
certain level of maturity before joining. This criteria will be well
publicized and aspiring associations will be provided with resources and
support in forming. It is not our intention to hinder membership of new
associations.

Membership will be open to any national or larger (e.g. multi-national or
continental) association of research software engineers/engineering that
have achieved the following:

-   Created an identifiable and branded web presence
-   Agree to participate in the International RSE survey
-   Created a unique and branded forum (persistent chat (channel),
    mailing list, etc.) consisting of 20 or more individuals with active
    participation from members
-   Uniquely represents the RSE community in one or more countries
-   Has had at least one (documented) group activity in the 12 months
    before joining the Council, such as a community event, community
    call, annual general meeting, or similar

There is no membership fee.

### Observing Participants

The Council welcomes representatives of nascent communities (i.e., those
that do not yet meet the requirements for membership) to join Council
meetings as observers. At the end of Council meetings, observing
participants will be offered the opportunity to ask questions to the
Council or offer items for discussion. Non-member participation is
intended to give the leaders of burgeoning communities an opportunity to
listen and learn from Council associations to further support the growth
of their communities. The ability to participate as an observer will be
advertised and open to those who register in advance.

## Requirements of Member Associations

Each member association is expected to appoint two (2) representatives
to the Council. Representatives should be members of the association's
leadership group, well versed in current RSE events and capable of
speaking on behalf of the association.

Virtual meetings will be held at a minimum of 2-4 times per year. At
least one (1) representative from each member association will be
expected to regularly attend these Council meetings.

## Internal Organization of the Council

The only named role within the Council will be a rotating meeting chair.
Each meeting will have a new meeting chair responsible for setting the
agenda and hosting the meeting. Chairs will rotate through the member
associations (not representatives). The next rotating chair will be
decided at the conclusion of the previous Council meeting.

### Decision making

Any decision may be taken either:

1.  At a meeting of the Council members; or
2.  By resolution in writing or electronic form agreed by a majority of
    all of the Council member associations.
3.  If a decision cannot be reached through consensus, decisions are
    reached by vote where each association represented in the Council
    has a single vote, and votes need the majority of all associations
    represented in the Council to pass. Decisions requiring a vote will
    be brought forward as a motion to vote. A vote of member
    associations shall close no earlier than 1 week after the motion to
    vote has been brought forward and when a majority has been reached,
    or votes from all associations have been collected.

### Charter approval/modification

Proposed changes to this charter can be passed by obtaining a consensus
vote from each member organisation, or by a greater-than-two-thirds
majority of votes following the procedure outlined above.

## Code of Conduct

The [Council Code of Conduct](https://researchsoftware.org/council/code-of-conduct.html) is published on the Council website. All
Council meetings and interactions will adhere to the Council Code of
Conduct.
